attempt to rewrite #149 to simplify manufacturer/endorser (#154)
ietf-rats-wg/architecture: draft-ietf-rats-architecture.md

## Attester

> The manufacturer of the Attester arranges to provision keying material into into the Attester.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The manufacturer of the Attester arranges to for the Attester to be provisioned with keying material.
```

> The manufacturer of the Attester arranges for the Attester to be provisioned with key material.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The manufacturer of the Attester arranges for its Attesting Environment to be provisioned with key material.
```

> As an Endorser, this manufacturer also arranges for the Verifier to be able to verify signatures from this keying material.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an Endorser, this manufacturer also arranges for the Verifier to be able to verify signatures from this key material.
```

> This is typically in the form of asymmetric keypairs (e.g., an RSA or ECDSA private key

Author: ```suggestion
The key material is typically in the form of asymmetric keypairs (e.g., an RSA or ECDSA private key
```

> The key material is typically in the form of asymmetric key pair (e.g., an RSA or ECDSA private key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key material is typically in the form of an asymmetric key pair (e.g., an RSA or ECDSA private key
```

> The key material is typically in the form of an asymmetric key pair (e.g., an RSA or ECDSA private key
> and a manufacturer signed IDevID certificate) secured in the Attester, with an appropriate trust anchor provided to the Verifier.
> The key material may instead be in other forms, including databases of public keys (rather than certificates), or even carefully secured lists of symmetric keys.

Author: ```suggestion
The signing key material is typically in the form of an asymmetric key pair (e.g., an RSA or ECDSA private key
and a manufacturer signed IDevID certificate) secured in the Attester.

The Verifier is provided with an appropriate trust anchor, or provided with a database of public keys (rather than certificates), or even carefully secured lists of symmetric keys.
```

> But, these Endorsements may come in many other forms including databases of public keys (rather than certificates), or even carefully secured lists of symmetric keys.

Author: ```suggestion
The key material may instead be in other forms, including databases of public keys (rather than certificates), or even carefully secured lists of symmetric keys.
```

> But, these Endorsements may come in many other forms including databases of public keys (rather than certificates), or even carefully secured lists of symmetric keys.

Reviewer: "these Endorsements" doesn't make sense in context since you haven't mentioned any Endorsements, and the trust anchor provisioned in the Verifier need not be from an Endorsement

## Attester

The manufacturer of the Attester arranges for its Attesting Environment to be provisioned with key material.

> As an Endorser, this manufacturer also arranges for the Verifier to be able to verify signatures from this key material.

Author: ```suggestion
```

The Verifier trusts (or more specifically, the Verifier's security
policy is written in a way that configures the Verifier to trust) a
manufacturer, or the manufacturer's hardware, so as to be able to
appraise the trustworthiness of that manufacturer's devices.

> 

Reviewer: In a typical solution, a Verifier comes to trust an Attester
indirectly by having an Endorser (such as a manufacturer) vouch for
the Attester's ability to securely generate Evidence.
In some solutions, a Verifier might be configured to directly
trust an Attester by having the Verifier have the Attester's key
material (rather than the Endorser's) in its trust anchor store.

Such direct trust must first be established at the time of trust anchor
store configuration either by checking with an Endorser at that
time, or by conducting a security analysis of the specific device.
Having the Attester directly in the trust anchor store narrows
the Verifier's trust to only specific devices rather than all devices
the Endorser might vouch for, such as all devices manufactured by the
same manufacturer in the case that the Endorser is a manufacturer.

Such narrowing is often important since physical possession of a device
can also be used to conduct a number of attacks, and so a device in
a physically secure environment (such as one's own premises) may be
considered trusted whereas devices owned by others would not be.
This often results in a desire to either have the owner run their
own Endorser that would only Endorse devices one owns, or to use
Attesters directly in the trust anchor store.   When there are many
Attesters owned, the use of an Endorser becomes more scalable.

Reviewer 2: "by having the Verifier have the Attester's key material"

The Verifier is "made having this key material" by the Endorser role. As a result, in this case the Endorser and Verifier Owner role are probably collapsed?

> In solutions with weaker security, a Verifier might be configured to implicitly
> trust firmware or even software (e.g., a hypervisor).

Author: ```suggestion
In some solutions a Verifier might be configured to directly
trust firmware or even software (e.g., a hypervisor) of a specific device.
```

That is, it might appraise the trustworthiness of an application component, operating
system component, or service under the assumption that information

> provided about it by the lower-layer hypervisor or firmware is true.

Author: ```suggestion
provided about it by the lower-layer firmware or software is true.
```

A stronger level of assurance of security comes when information can be vouched
for by hardware or by ROM code, especially if such hardware is
physically resistant to hardware tampering.

> The component that is implicitly trusted is often referred to as a Root of Trust.

Reviewer 3: I think the above text applies only to local attestation because of the phrase "implicitly trust".  

Since the main subject of this document is remote attestation, I think this paragraph should be move down several paragraphs and clearly prefaced to indicate it is about local attestation that is distinct from the main topic of remote attestation.

Reviewer: I think all of the text above is actually about remote (and local, but the main scope is remote) attestation.

Reviewer 2: While the text refers to HW & SW, as well as elaborates on a specific security considerations unique to a "hardware root of trust", I think it is very much applicable to remote attestation as a whole.

I'd like to see feedback on a specific question, though:

How is a conveyance of data without any "cryptographic proof of trustworthiness" still an attestation procedure at all? "Local" attestation is typically realized via policies that reside in HW roots of trusts. These policies are deployed on an Attester by a trusted party and are semantically close related with the duties of a Verifier, I think (therefore the "local" attestation).

Reviewer 3: When there is local trust between the Attester and Verifier it is because they are on the same chip, the same bus or such. The connection between them is trusted without crypto.

The use of the word "implicit" is what makes it local to me. In remote Attestation, the trust is explicit. The Attester manufacturer tells the Verifier it can trust the Attester explicitly.

> The component that is implicitly trusted is often referred to as a Root of Trust.

Author: ```suggestion
The component that is trusted is often referred to as a Root of Trust.
```

> The component that is implicitly trusted is often referred to as a Root of Trust.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In most cases, components that have to be vouched for via Endorsement because no Evidence can be created about them are referred to as a roots of trust.
```

The manufacturer of the Attester arranges for its Attesting Environment to be provisioned with key material.

The signing key material is typically in the form of an asymmetric key pair (e.g., an RSA or ECDSA private key

> and a manufacturer signed IDevID certificate) secured in the Attester.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and a manufacturer-signed IDevID certificate) secured in the Attester.
```

Is there a citation for "IDevID"?

The Verifier is provided with an appropriate trust anchor, or provided with a database of public keys (rather than certificates), or even carefully secured lists of symmetric keys.

> The nature of how the Verifier manages to validate the signatures produced by the Attester is critical to the secure operation an Attestation system, but is not the subject of standardization within this architecture.

Author: ```suggestion
The nature of how the Verifier manages to validate the signatures produced by the Attester is critical to the secure operation an Attestation system, but is not the subject of standardization within this architecture.
In remote attestation procedures, a Verifier comes to trust a Attester with the help of Endorsers. 
The role of Endorser is often taken on by an Attester's manufacturer.
```

Reviewer: Proposed line 834 is not quite correct, and the text up in 791-797 was intended to replace that.

> 

Reviewer 3: I would like to add:

> In remote attestation, the Verifier comes to trust the Attester transitively through the Endorser and/or Attester manufacturer.

Reviewer: While that is typical, in some corner cases that would be false, so would only be ok in my opinion if "typically" were added to that suggestion.

Reviewer 2: I would simply remove the term "transitively", tbh. Also, the entity here is the manufacturer, which takes on the role of Endorser. I propose to remove the and/or and rephrase as follows:

> In remote attestation procedures, a Verifier comes to trust a Attester with the help of Endorsers. The role of Endorser is often taken on by an Attester's manufacturer.

I did not include the "typical" proposed by Dave here for now. Is that still needed with the new phrasing? While I think so, I also think it would help to understand what Dave means with "n some corner cases that would be false". We might have already elaborated on this, but my memory fails me right now.

The Verifier trusts (or more specifically, the Verifier's security
policy is written in a way that configures the Verifier to trust) a
manufacturer, or the manufacturer's hardware, so as to be able to
appraise the trustworthiness of that manufacturer's devices.
In a typical solution, a Verifier comes to trust an Attester
indirectly by having an Endorser (such as a manufacturer) vouch for

> the Attester's ability to securely generate Evidence.
> In some solutions, a Verifier might be configured to directly

Author: ```suggestion
the Attester's ability to securely generate Evidence.

In some solutions, a Verifier might be configured to directly
```

trust an Attester by having the Verifier have the Attester's key

> material (rather than the Endorser's) in its trust anchor store.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
material (rather than the Endorser's) in its trust anchor store.

XXX - add more text about indirect case

```

trust an Attester by having the Verifier have the Attester's key
material (rather than the Endorser's) in its trust anchor store.

Such direct trust must first be established at the time of trust anchor
store configuration either by checking with an Endorser at that
time, or by conducting a security analysis of the specific device.
Having the Attester directly in the trust anchor store narrows
the Verifier's trust to only specific devices rather than all devices
the Endorser might vouch for, such as all devices manufactured by the
same manufacturer in the case that the Endorser is a manufacturer.

Such narrowing is often important since physical possession of a device
can also be used to conduct a number of attacks, and so a device in
a physically secure environment (such as one's own premises) may be
considered trusted whereas devices owned by others would not be.
This often results in a desire to either have the owner run their
own Endorser that would only Endorse devices one owns, or to use
Attesters directly in the trust anchor store.   When there are many
Attesters owned, the use of an Endorser becomes more scalable.

> In solutions with weaker security, a Verifier might be configured to implicitly
> trust firmware or even software (e.g., a hypervisor).

Author: ```suggestion

```

That is, it might appraise the trustworthiness of an application component, operating
system component, or service under the assumption that information
provided about it by the lower-layer firmware or software is true.
A stronger level of assurance of security comes when information can be vouched
for by hardware or by ROM code, especially if such hardware is
physically resistant to hardware tampering.

> In most cases, components that have to be vouched for via Endorsements because no Evidence is generated about them are referred to as a roots of trust.

Author: ```suggestion
In most cases, components that have to be vouched for via Endorsements because no Evidence is generated about them are referred to as roots of trust.
```

> In most cases, components that have to be vouched for via Endorsements because no Evidence can be created about them are referred to as a roots of trust.

Author: ```suggestion
In most cases, components that have to be vouched for via Endorsements because no Evidence is generated about them are referred to as a roots of trust.
```

The manufacturer of the Attester arranges for its Attesting Environment to be provisioned with key material.

> 
> The signing key material is typically in the form of an asymmetric key pair (e.g., an RSA or ECDSA private key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key material is typically in the form of an asymmetric key pair (e.g., an RSA or ECDSA private key
```

Lins 826 just says "key material" not "signing key material".  Pick one and be consistent.

   2. All unprotected Evidence that is conveyed is supplied exclusively by the Attesting Environment that has the key  material that protects the conveyance channel
   3. The Root of Trust protects both the conveyance channel key material and the Attesting Environment with equivalent strength protections.

See {{security-considerations}} for discussion on security strength.

> 

Reviewer 3: The anchor for {{security-considerations}} needs to be added.

Reviewer 2: I took the liberty and addressed the comment directly in this PR. Please find the added label below.
